L1: Precision CRISPR annotation of the functional enhancer landscape in primary human T cells
L2: bioRxiv (2026)
L3: Ping Wang, Josephine R. Giles, Hua Huang, Sasikanth Manne, Martha S. Jordan, Alexander C. Huang, Junwei Shi, E. John Wherry
L4: 1Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L5: 2Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L6: 3Department of Cancer Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L7: 4Epigenetics Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L8: 5Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L9: 6Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L10: 7Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L11: 8Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L12: 9Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
L13: DOI: 10.64898/2026.01.27.702006
L14: Regular Article
L15: New Results
L16: Immunology
L17: Received: 27-1-2026
L18: Rev-Recd: 27-1-2026
L19: Accepted: 29-1-2026
L20: Precise modulation of T cell function through engineering the non-coding genome holds great promise for advancing next-generation immunotherapies. However, robust high-throughput approaches to annotate functional cis-regulatory elements (CRE) in human T cells remain limited. Here, we developed a simple and highly efficient CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) perturbation platform to systematically annotate CREs in human primary T cells. Using this platform, we identified novel CREs controlling PDCD1, HAVCR2, and TBX21 expression. Combinatorial CRE perturbations revealed synergistic CRE pairs that fine-tune PDCD1 and HAVCR2 expression, while Cas9-indel-based mutagenesis pinpointed the critical nucleotides within each enhancer that are essential for their activity. Functional experiments demonstrated that CRE-edited HAVCR2 outperformed conventional total gene knockout in enhancing CAR T cell anti-tumor efficacy. Moreover, CRE editing of PDCD1 and HAVCR2 repressed PD-1 and TIM-3 expression in human tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte CD8 T cells, highlighting regulatory role of these CREs in disease relevant exhausted T cells. Together, this approach offers a compact CRISPRi platform that enables high-throughput dissection of functionally relevant non-coding genomic regions in T cells, providing insights for mechanistic studies and precision genome engineering of advanced cellular therapies.
L21: Main
L22: T cell immunotherapy shows great promise for treating cancer and immune-related diseases1,2. Conventional genome engineering in primary human T cells has primarily focused on the protein-coding sequences, overlooking the 98%-99% of the genome where non-coding cis-regulatory elements (CREs), “enhancers” and “silencers”, reside. CREs play a critical role in controlling gene expression in a cell-type-specific manner, shaping cellular identity and function3. Manipulating CREs offers a nuanced strategy to precisely control gene expression in T cells for mechanistic studies and for cellular therapies. However, identifying functional CREs in primary human T cells remains challenging, restricting both our understanding of gene regulation and our capacity to optimize T cell function through engineering the regulatory landscape.
L23: High-throughput epigenomic and transcriptomic profiling have identified hundreds of thousands to millions of candidate CREs genome-wide in human T cell subsets, but defining the functional relevance of these elements has remained challenging4,5. Developing unbiased functional genomic approaches to identify CREs in human T cells is essential to annotate the functional components of these transcriptional regulatory networks, and enable precise, cell-type-specific genome engineering. CRISPR-based approaches, including Cas9-mediated indel mutagenesis and CRISPR interference (CRISPRi), have enabled high-throughput screens of functional CREs at single-nucleotide or sub-kilobase resolution6,7. However, these screens have largely been confined to immortalized cell lines, due to low editing efficiency, challenges in transduction, and design constraints that restrict scalability in primary human T cells. This gap has hindered efforts to decode the gene regulatory networks that control human T cell function. Moreover, although CREs typically span hundreds of base pairs, only discrete short sequences within these DNA elements are essential for regulatory activity8. Mapping these functional elements in primary T cells is necessary to decode enhancer logic and enable precise genome engineering for immunotherapy.
L24: Inhibitory receptors (IRs), such as PD-1, CTLA-4, LAG-3, and TIM-3, are major regulators of T cell responses. IRs maintain immune homeostasis by preventing excessive activation9–12, but in chronic disease they can suppress effective T cell activity and block the clearance of cancer cells or persistent pathogens, making these receptors (and their genes) attractive targets for immune engineering13. Indeed, targeting IRs, such as CTLA-4, PD-1, and LAG-3 has revolutionized treatments for human cancer in large part by modulating human T cell differentiation including reinvigorating exhausted T cells14,15,16. In preclinical models, other IRs including TIM-3 have received considerable attention for regulating T cell biology17–19. These strategies extend beyond cancer. For example, IR blockade or genetic ablation can enhance T cell anti-tumor activity, whereas agonistic therapies can suppress overactive immune responses in autoimmunity20. Thus, targeting IRs remains a central focus of therapeutic development across diverse diseases. Despite the success of targeting and ablating IR signaling clinically, these binary “on/off” interventions can disrupt immune balance, leading to adverse effects21,22. For example, although genetic deletion of PD-1 can initially enhance antiviral T cell responses during chronic infection, permanent loss of all PD-1 signals ultimately accelerates T cell exhaustion and causes these responses to decline over time23. In acute-resolving infection, PD-1 knockout (KO) CD8 T cells compromise the optimal formation of long-term memory24 and the differentiation of early “stem-like” CD8 T cell populations9. Indeed, in humans, full PD-1 KO in Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T cells fails to provide sustained benefit, and these cells are less fit over time25,26. These data highlight the need for more precise modulation of IR expression to achieve robust and durable therapeutic benefits. In mice, tuning PD-1 expression via deleting an enhancer specific to exhausted CD8 T cells improved CD8 T cell function and reduced immunopathology compared to full PD-1 genetic KO27,28. These observations highlight the potential of cell-state-specific enhancer targeting for tunable IR control in T cells. However, how human IRs and other key T cell differentiation genes are epigenetically regulated remains largely unexplored. Comprehensive functional interrogation of human T cell CREs is therefore essential to enable precise IR modulation, and such data may provide a foundation for advancing next-generation cell therapies via non-coding genome engineering.
L25: Here, we developed a streamlined and optimized CRISPRi platform for systematic functional annotation of CREs in primary human CD8 T cells. By combining tiling and ATAC-seq-guided CRISPRi screens, we identified novel CREs regulating expression of key IRs, PDCD1 (encoding PD-1) and HAVCR2 (encoding TIM-3), as well as the transcription factor TBX21 (encoding TBET) that controls effector genes. Saturation mutagenesis using Cas9-induced indels revealed critical DNA sequences within PDCD1 and HAVCR2 enhancers. Multiplexed CRE perturbations further uncovered CRE combinations that broadened the dynamic range of gene expression modulation. Functionally, editing of HAVCR2 CREs outperformed conventional coding-region knockouts in a CAR T cell model. Moreover, CRE editing of PDCD1 and HAVCR2 effectively reduced PD-1 and TIM-3 expression in tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) CD8 T cells. Altogether, our study presents a compact CRISPRi platform that enables high-throughput functional dissection of non-coding regions in primary human T cells, offering insights for gene regulation and opportunities for precision genome engineering and improved cellular therapies.
L26: Results
L27: Development of a high-efficiency all-in-one CRISPRi platform for CRE screening in primary human CD8 T cells
L28: We set out to optimize a CRISPRi system to enable high-throughput functional annotation of CREs in primary human T cells. Traditional CRISPRi relies on a catalytically dead Cas9 (dCas9) protein fused to a wild-type Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain, to recruit repressive complexes and deposit H3K9me3 on chromatin, enabling CRE scanning at ∼0.5-2 kb resolution29–31. Previous work employed a dual-vector lentiviral system, one encoding the sgRNA and another encoding the dCas9-KRAB, to target CREs in primary T cells32. This approach suffered from low co-transduction efficiency, limiting scalability to large-scale screens. To address this limitation, we engineered an all-in-one CRISPRi system by combining the sgRNA and dCas9-KRAB cassettes (driven by bidirectional promoters) into a single lentiviral vector co-expressing a GFP marker, enabling tracking of CRISPRi positive cells (Extended Data Fig. 1a). This system achieved an average CRISPRi transduction efficiency of 33.3% in primary human CD8 T cells, compared to 12.2% with the conventional dual-vector system (Extended Data Fig. 1b, c). To further enhance silencing efficiency, we tested two engineered variants of the ZNF10-KRAB domain (WSR8EEE-KRAB and AW7EE-KRAB)33 and one KRAB from ZIM334 using sgRNAs targeting of the CXCR3 promoter. CXCR3 is a chemokine receptor expressed widely by memory CD8 T cells in human blood and can be easily measured by flow cytometry. Surface expression of CXCR3 was measured by flow cytometry as a proxy for gene silencing. All three alternative KRAB variants outperformed wild-type ZNF10-KRAB, with ZIM3-KRAB exhibiting the highest silencing efficiency, increasing repression from ∼69% to ∼85% (Extended Data Fig. 1d, e).
L29: Next, we designed a pooled sgRNA library screen to evaluate the performance of the improved all-in-one CRISPRi system (Fig. 1a). We selected the CXCR3 genomic region as a model to assess the capacity of this system for identifying functional CREs, given the relative simplicity of the CXCR3 locus and the ease of monitoring cell surface protein expression35. Two sgRNA libraries were designed: (1) an accessible chromatin region (ACR)-guided library consisting of 231 sgRNAs targeting 17 ACRs identified by ATAC-seq in primary human T cells, and (2) a tiled library of 901 sgRNAs spaced at 200bp intervals spanning ∼292kb upstream and ∼42kb downstream of the CXCR3 locus (for a total of a ∼335kb genomic region; Supplementary Table 2). Both libraries included positive control sgRNAs targeting the CXCR3 promoter and a previously validated enhancer32, along with non-targeting sgRNAs and sgRNAs for non-accessible unrelated genomic regions as negative controls. Human primary CD8 T cells from two healthy donors were activated in vitro and transduced with each pooled library at low multiplicity of infection. On day 5 post transduction, cells in the top and bottom 20% of CXCR3 surface expression were isolated at a minimum of 1000 cells/sgRNA coverage of the library, and sgRNA representation was quantified by deep sequencing. To assess the performance of each sgRNA, a CRISPRi score was calculated as the log2-fold change (Log2FC) in abundance of the bottom versus the top bins (Fig. 1a). For the tiled library, we leveraged the high sgRNA density by applying a sliding-window analysis. Using an optimized 20-sgRNA window, we averaged consecutive sgRNA scores to minimize variability of individual sgRNAs, enhancing peak detection and capturing regional regulatory context with the highest inter-donor correlation (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b). Results from two donors were well correlated in both the ACR and tiling screens (Extended Data Fig. 3a), and the negative control sgRNAs centered around 0, indicating low noise in the pooled library screens (Extended Data Fig. 3b).
L30: All-in-one CRISPRi screening platform identified functional CREs of PDCD1 and HAVCR2. a, Schematic of all-in-one CRISPRi pooled screens for discovering functional CREs in primary human CD8 T cells. Two parallel sgRNA libraries were designed: library 1 targeted ACRs within 100kb upstream and downstream of the TSS with 4-6 sgRNAs designed per ACR; library 2 tiled this region with sgRNAs at 200bp intervals. b,c, Representative flow cytometry plots showing sorting of the top and bottom 20% of cells based on PD-1 (b) or TIM-3 (c) expression for the pooled CRISPRi genetic screening. d,e, Results of pooled CRISPRi screens for CRE of PDCD1 (d) or HAVCR2 (e) using ACR and tiled library designs (donor ND584). Top, ACR library screen. Blue dots, pre-validated positive controls. Orange dots, sgRNAs targeting ACRs. Middle, tiled library screen. Red and light blue bars indicate average CRISPRi scores for the tiled library screening, calculated based on a sliding window of 20 consecutive sgRNAs. Bottom, ATAC-seq profiles of the corresponding genomic regions. Gray shaded areas are zoomed-in regions with high CRISPRi scoring sgRNAs (Log2FoldChange > 1). Green dots, sgRNAs from the tiled library. Red curves represent the same data from the red bars as a smoothed line. f,g, Representative flow cytometry plots showing validation of putative CREs using individual sgRNAs, CRISPRi-mediated reduction of PD-1(f) or TIM-3 (g) expression. Numbers represent MFI, colors coded accordingly. h,i, Quantification of MFI from (f) and (g) for CRISPRi-mediated reduction of PD-1 (h) and TIM-3 (i). Data represent mean ± s.e.m.; n = 3 donors, three independent experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P<0.0001, two-tailed Student’s t-test.
L31: The screening libraries identified the previously defined enhancer as well as two additional proximal CREs. Across all screens, sgRNAs targeting regions proximal to the TSS yielded the strongest silencing of CXCR3 (Extended Data Fig. 3c-f). The previously described -4.1kb enhancer of CXCR3 32 was also re-identified using independent sgRNAs from both libraries, confirming the robustness of this screening approach (Extended Data Fig. 3c-f). Two new CREs located 1.6 kb and 2.3 kb downstream of the CXCR3 TSS were identified, showing strong CRISPRi scores above background (Extended Data Fig. 3c-f). This +2.3 kb CRE was not included in the ACR library because this region had variable chromatin accessibility across multiple donors in a reference ATAC-seq dataset32. This region scored highly, however, in the tiled library in both donors tested in this screen. To validate the screening results, the candidate +1.6 kb, +2.3 kb, and -4.1 kb CREs were individually tested. Targeting each of these three regions resulted in strong reduction of CXCR3 protein expression measured by flow cytometry (Extended Data Fig. 3g). Together, these results demonstrate the high efficiency and low noise of our optimized all-in-one CRISPRi system to discover known and novel functional regulatory elements in human primary CD8 T cells.
L32: All-in-one CRISPRi screening identifies functional CREs of inhibitory receptors in human primary CD8 T cells
L33: Engineering the non-coding genome offers a powerful and precise way to modulate gene expression. Tuning expression of IRs by T cells could be used to restore T cell function during chronic infection and cancer, while limiting risks of immune pathology. To this end, we performed unbiased genetic screens targeting the genomic regions surrounding PDCD1 (encoding PD-1) and HAVCR2 (encoding TIM-3), two key IRs involved in regulating CD8 T cell responses in cancer and chronic infections. First, we performed a time-course analysis of PD-1 and TIM-3 expression in CD8 T cells from two healthy donors to determine the optimal time points for CRISPRi-mediated repression. Flow cytometry measurement after sgRNAs targeting the IR promoters revealed days 4 and 6 post-activation as the optimal timepoints for detecting surface PD-1 and TIM-3 repression, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b). We designed both ACR and tiling sgRNA libraries targeting ∼200 kb flanking regions (+100kb and -100kb) of PDCD1 or HAVCR2 genomic loci. The tiling libraries contained over 1,000 sgRNAs and the ACR libraries included 200-300 sgRNAs (Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). Screens were performed in CD8 T cells from two donors as described in the CXCR3 screens (Fig. 1a). The top and bottom 20% of cells expressing the protein of interest were sorted at the peak repression timepoints (day 4 for PDCD1 and day 6 for HAVCR2) and subjected to deep sequencing to determine the CRISPRi scores (Fig. 1a-c). Results for PDCD1 and HAVCR2 were well correlated between donors for both libraries (Extended Data Fig. 5a, b).
L34: ACR and tiling screens identified candidate functional CREs for PDCD1 and HAVCR2. Negative controls and promoter-targeting sgRNAs behaved as expected (Fig. 1d, e; Extended Data Fig. 5c, d). The tiling screen uncovered distinct distal CRE peaks, including previously uncharacterized elements approximately 15 kb downstream of the PDCD1 TSS, as well as −33 kb and +80 kb from the HAVCR2 TSS (Fig. 1d, e; Extended Data Fig. 5c, d). Guided by the ACR screens, we found focal enrichment of multiple active sgRNAs at putative CREs: +14.8 kb and +16.1 kb for PDCD1, and −33 kb, +78.5 kb, and +84 kb for HAVCR2 (Fig. 1d, e; Extended Data Fig. 5c, d).
L35: To validate the screening results, the newly discovered CREs were individually tested by CRISPRi using three additional donors. Flow cytometry revealed a 15-25% reduction in PD-1 surface expression for sgRNAs targeting the PDCD1 +14.8kb and +16.1kb CREs, compared to ∼50% reduction with a promoter-targeting sgRNA (Fig. 1f, h). Similarly, sgRNAs targeting HAVCR2 CREs located at -33 kb, +78.5 kb, and +84 kb decreased TIM-3 expression by 25-50%, versus a 75% reduction with TSS-targeting sgRNAs (Fig. 1g, i). qPCR analysis confirmed corresponding reductions in PDCD1 and HAVCR2 mRNA expression, consistent with the protein expression changes and the original screening results (Extended Data Fig. 5e, f).
L36: To further evaluate the enhancer activity of these distal CREs, we employed a minimal promoter-driven GFP reporter system. Full-length DNA fragments of PDCD1 +16.1kb CRE and the three distal HAVCR2 CREs (−33 kb, +78.5 kb, and +84 kb) were individually cloned into lentiviral reporter constructs and transduced into primary human CD8 T cells (Extended Data Fig. 6a). The PDCD1 +16.1 kb CRE increased GFP expression ∼2.6-fold, whereas the HAVCR2 CREs (−33 kb, +78.5 kb, +84 kb) increased GFP by 2.5–6-fold compared to negative controls (Extended Data Fig. 6b,c). Altogether, these data indicate that this all-in-one CRISPRi platform is capable of identifying novel functional CREs that regulate PDCD1 and HAVCR2 expression in primary human CD8 T cells.
L37: All-in-one CRISPRi screening identifies functional CREs of
L38: IRs are of considerable interest for controlling T cell function and exhaustion and can be easily screened in the approaches above because of cell surface protein expression. Transcription factors (TF) also have a major role in regulating T cell function and differentiation, often governing expression of suites of related genes and gene programs. It was unclear, however, whether an intracellular staining approach to assess changes in protein expression would be compatible with the sequencing readouts needed for the CRE screening. To address this question and test the broader applicability of genetic screening beyond cell-surface proteins (e.g. IRs), we evaluated the performance of our all-in-one CRISPRi system for studying CREs regulating TFs in T cells, where measuring protein expression changes requires cell fixation and permeabilization. We focused on TBX21 (encoding TBET), a master TF that enhances IFN-γ production and the effector T cell cytotoxicity program36. Because of fluorescent signal loss caused by cell fixation and permeabilization during intracellular staining, we replaced the GFP reporter with Thy1.1 (CD90.1), a congenic cell-surface protein that can be stained and used to sort CRISPRi positive cells. Given the correlation between ACR and tiling library screens in the studies above, we designed only an ACR library for TBX21, consisting of 350 sgRNAs, targeting 40 ACRs across a 213kb genomic region flanking TBX21 (Supplementary Table 5). Pooled CRISPRi screens were performed in CD8 T cells from two donors, with cells sorted into the top and bottom 20% of TBET-expressing populations 5 days post-activation, followed by sequencing (Fig. 2a and Extended Data Fig. 4b).
L39: All-in-one CRISPRi screening platform identified functional CREs regulating TBX21 expression. a, Flow cytometry plots showing sorting of the top and bottom 20% of cells based on TBET expression for the pooled CRISPRi genetic screening. b, Scatter plot showing reproducibility of CRISPRi screening across two donors. Each dot represents a single sgRNA (R = 0.8885, Pearson correlation). c,d, ACR library screens for functional CREs of TBX21 in donor ND584 (c) and donor ND539 (d). Blue dots denote positive controls. Orange dots represent sgRNAs targeting ACRs. Gray shaded areas are zoomed-in regions containing high CRISPRi score sgRNAs (Log2FoldChange>1). e, Representative flow cytometry plots of TBET expression in negative control, TSS, and CRE targeted T cells by CRISPRi (numbers on top right indicate MFI). f, Quantification of TBET expression from (e) across donors. Data represent mean ± s.e.m.; n=3 donors, three independent experiments. g, Schematic of using CRISPRa to activate TBX21. h, Representative flow cytometry plots of TBET expression in negative control, TBX21 TSS and CRE targeted groups by CRISPRa. i, Summary of TBET high proportion quantified from (h) (n=3 donors, mean ± s.e.m.; two independent experiments). j, Representative flow cytometry histograms of GZMB expression in TBET high cells with TBX21 TSS or CREs targeted by CRISPRa (numbers on bottom left indicate MFI). k, Quantification of GZMB expression from (j) across donors (n=3 donors, mean ± s.e.m.; two independent experiments). l, Representative flow cytometry histograms of Perforin expression in TBET high cells with TBX21 TSS or CREs targeted by CRISPRa (numbers on bottom right indicate MFI). m, Quantification of Perforin expression from (l) across donors (n = 3 donors, mean ± s.e.m.; two independent experiments). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, two-tailed Student’s t-test. Numbers for MFIs are color coded accordingly.
L40: This TF-focused CRE screening approach produced robust signals and enabled the identification of CREs controlling TBET expression and the results between donors were well correlated (Fig. 2b). Positive control sgRNAs targeting the TSS (−257bp and +1.6kb) were readily recovered in the screen (Fig. 2c, d). Three additional distal regions, located at -12.3kb, -13.3kb, and -13.7kb, were also identified as candidate CREs of TBX21 (Fig. 2c, d). To verify the function of putative CREs, we selected high-scoring sgRNAs to target each CRE individually. qRT-PCR and flow cytometry confirmed that targeting these regions reduced TBX21 mRNA and TBET protein expression to varying degrees, consistent with screening results, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 5g; Fig. 2e, f). Using the minimal promoter-driven GFP reporter system described above, we further demonstrated that inclusion of full-length DNA fragments of these three CREs increased GFP expression over 2-fold compared to the control (Extended Data Fig. 6b, c). TBET is a master regulator of effector gene expression in T cells including GZMB and Perforin37. We, therefore, next employed CRISPR activation (CRISPRa) to investigate the role of the identified CREs in regulating these cytotoxic genes (Fig. 2g). Targeting the TBX21 TSS or CREs generated TBET high cells whereas there was little TBET expression in the negative control sgRNA cells (Fig. 2h). TSS targeting resulted in 15%-20% TBET high populations compared to the negative control, and targeting the CRE yielded 10%-20% TBET high cells (Fig. 2i). Thus, this CRE CRISPR screening platform was capable of being adapted for assessment of regulatory regions even for proteins that required intracellular staining.
L41: One motivation for adapting this screening strategy to intracellular proteins was to probe the regulatory control of TFs. Given that TFs often sit at the apex of transcriptional circuitry controlling coordinated gene programs, we reasoned that targeting CREs in the TBX21 locus regulating TBET expression would elicit corresponding changes in other TBET-dependent genes. Indeed, GZMB and Perforin expression were significantly higher in cells where CRISPRa targeting of TBX21 CREs led to higher TBET expression, compared to TBET-low cells from the negative control. In these cells, there was a 1.6–2.2 fold increase in GZMB and a 1.4–1.7 fold increase in Perforin expression (Fig. 2j–m), demonstrating that CRE-mediated enhancement of TBET expression was both transcriptionally and biologically functional. Collectively, these data identify novel CREs and highlight the utility of this all-in-one CRISPRi platform for high-throughput CRE screening of genes encoding not only cell-surface proteins, but also intracellular molecules such as TFs.
L42: Fine-mapping of critical sequences in CREs using Cas9-mediated indel saturation mutagenesis
L43: CREs control gene expression through multiple mechanisms including the binding of regulatory factors, such as TFs, at specific DNA sequences. Whereas CRISPRi-based perturbations can identify functional CREs at sub-kilobase resolution, dissecting these specific short DNA sequences underlying CRE activity requires higher-resolution perturbations. CRISPR-Cas9-induced double-strand breaks (DSB) at critical sites within CREs can disrupt their activity, enabling high-resolution dissection of CREs8. To pinpoint the specific sequences that confer function of the PDCD1 and HAVCR2 CREs, we used a Cas9-induced saturation mutagenesis strategy. This approach creates small insertions or deletions (typically 1–10 bp) at target sites within these CREs and enables screening with densely tiled sgRNAs libraries spanning each enhancer.
L44: To enable Cas9-indel screening in a single-vector format, we modified our all-in-one CRISPRi construct by replacing dCas9-ZIM3 with catalytically active Cas9. All possible sgRNAs were designed to target the two novel CREs of PDCD1 and the three CREs of HAVCR2 identified from our CRISPRi screens (∼190 sgRNA for each; Supplementary Table 6). For each library, positive controls included guides targeting exons and the 1kb upstream region of each TSS. Negative control sgRNAs were from the previous CRISPRi library and newly designed guides targeting 100 bp flanking sequences on either side of each enhancer. Screens were performed in CD8 T cells from two donors and CRISPR scores were generated for the top and bottom 20% of PDCD1 or HAVCR2 expressing cells, following the same workflow as our CRISPRi screens (Fig. 3a). Screens targeting HAVCR2 CREs were highly consistent across donors, while at the PDCD1 CREs showed only modest concordance, indicating potential donor-specific effects (Extended Data Fig. 7a, b).
L45: CRISPR saturation mutagenesis screening identifies essential components within PDCD1 and HAVCR2 CREs. a, Schematic of the CRISPR-based indel mutagenesis screens to map ESs within functional CREs of PDCD1 or HAVCR2. b,c, ESs screening results for PDCD1 (b) or HAVCR2 (c) within the identified CREs (donor ND584). CRISPR score was calculated as the log2-fold change (Log2FC) in the abundance of the bottom versus the top bins. Each dot represents the CRISPR score and genomic distribution of an individual sgRNA. Negative control sgRNAs, as well as those targeting TSS and exons, were pseudo-mapped with a 1-bp interval. d, Genomic distribution of high-scoring sgRNAs (CRISPR score >1) within the PDCD1 +14.8 kb, +16.1 kb, or HAVCR2 +84 kb CREs. Shaded boxes indicate ESs with clustered sgRNAs. e-g, Representative flow cytometry plots showing Cas9-mediated disruption of PES3 (e), PES6 (f), and HES1-3 and +2.2kb CRE (g). Numbers on the bottom are the MFI of each curve, colors coded accordingly. h,i, Normalized protein expression of PD-1 (h) or TIM-3 (i) from validation of the identified PDCD1 or HAVCR2 ESs by Cas9-indel mutagenesis. Colored bars represent mean ± s.e.m. of 3 donors and three independent experiments. Black bars mark the predicted CRISPR DNA cleavage sites. Shaded areas indicate the ESs. Dashed boxes highlight the predicted TF binding motifs. j,k, Representative flow cytometry plots and summarized MFI of PD-1(j) or TIM-3(k) with Cas9-indel mediated disruption of individual ES or CRISPRi-mediated reduction of the entire CRE. Each dot represents a donor. Bar represents mean ± s.e.m. of 3-4 donors from two independent experiments. ns, not significant. *P<0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P<0.0001, two-tailed Student’s t-test (h-k).
L46: Fine-mapping using this Cas9-indel screening approach identified essential sequences (ESs) within the newly defined PDCD1 and HAVCR2 enhancers. Most negative control sgRNAs had CRISPR scores centered around 0, with background variation ranging from -1 to +1. sgRNAs with the highest CRISPR scores (positive regulators of the target gene) clustered around the coding sequences and promoter-proximal regions (Fig. 3b, c; Extended Data Fig. 7c, d). Although most indel-targeting sgRNAs within the CREs had CRISPR scores similar to negative controls, there were clusters of high-scoring sgRNAs at focal regions within the PDCD1 +14.8 kb and +16.1 kb CREs, as well as in the HAVCR2 +2.2 kb and +84 kb CREs (Fig. 3b, c and Extended Data Fig. 7c, d). Since Cas9-induced indels occur within ∼10 bp of the predicted DNA cleavage site, we used these data to define genomic sites covered by these sgRNAs with high CRISPR scores (Log2FC>1) as ESs within these CREs. Using these criteria, we identified five and four PDCD1 ESs (PES1–5 and PES6–9) within the +14.8 kb and +16.1 kb CREs, respectively, and three HAVCR2 essential sequences (HES1–3) within the +84 kb CRE (Fig. 3d). To extend these findings, we individually introduced Cas9-induced indels to CD8 T cells from a third donor using multiple high-scoring sgRNAs targeting the identified ESs. Flow cytometry confirmed on-target reduction in PD-1 and TIM-3 protein expression following disruption of the ESs within the PDCD1 +14.8kb and +16.1kb CREs, as well as the HAVCR2 +84 kb and +2.2kb CRE (Fig. 3e-g, Extended Data Fig. 7e, f). High scoring sgRNAs targeting PES2 and PES9 were initially from one donor in the screening data. We validated these sites using two donors, the consistent reduction of PD-1 expression in both donors confirmed the reproducibility of PES2 and PES9 (Extended Data Fig. 7f).
L47: To evaluate the contribution of the short regulatory DNA sequences within ESs to overall gene regulation, we quantified the reduction in protein expression (MFI) after targeting the different ES regions. Disrupting PES2 and PES3 resulted in significant reduction in PD-1 expression compared to other PESs (Fig. 3h). Interfering with the HES1-3 within TIM-3 +84kb enhancer decreased TIM-3 expression, with HES2 having the strongest effect (Fig. 3i). Mapping the potential TF binding sites within PES2, PES3 and the three HESs using the MEME Suite revealed bHLH family motifs were enriched in PES2, whereas PES3 contained potential binding sites for TFAP2A/C, NFATC1/C3, and ZFX (Fig. 3h). For the HAVCR2, motifs from the STAT family, BCL6, and GLI3 were enriched most strongly in the HES2 site (Fig. 3i). To test the functional causality of these TF binding sites for the STAT family, we directly tested the role of STAT5B in regulating HAVCR2 expression. Indeed, CRISPRi-mediated knockdown of STAT5B in CD8 T cells reduced TIM-3 expression by 27%, indicating a role for STATs in regulating expression of this IR (Extended Data Fig. 7g, h).
L48: We next compared indel-based mutagenesis of a dominant ES with CRISPRi-mediated silencing of the corresponding full CRE to assess their relative effects on gene expression. For PDCD1, indel-based mutation of PES2 within the +14.8kb CRE resulted in similar reduction of PD-1 expression compared to full enhancer inhibition by CRISPRi (Fig. 3j). A similar result was observed at the HAVCR2 +84kb enhancer, where targeting only the ES resulted in a ∼50-60% reduction in TIM-3 expression similar to targeting the entire CRE, with no significant difference between the two approaches (Fig. 3k). Together, these data define functional components within the IR CREs and establish PES2, PES3, and HES2 as critical elements governing the function of the PDCD1 +14.8 kb and HAVCR2 +84 kb enhancers. Targeted disruption of these individual elements was sufficient to largely abrogate the enhancer function in human CD8 T cells.
L49: Combinatorial enhancer perturbation identifies optimal enhancer pairs for fine-tuning inhibitor receptor expression
L50: The results above identified multiple enhancers controlling PDCD1 and HAVCR2 expression, raising the question of whether these elements act in a coordinated manner to modulate IR expression. For the +14.8kb and +16.1kb CREs of PDCD1 and +84kb CRE of HAVCR2, most sgRNAs had high CRISPRi scores, consistent with strong regulatory function. In addition to these major enhancers, the CRISPRi screens also identified additional regions for both IR genes with potential contributory enhancer activity. However, these ACRs often only had one or two sgRNAs that yielded high scores, suggesting more modest or context-dependent activity. These regions include PDCD1 - 4.4 kb, -4.65 kb, and -38 kb ACRs, the HAVCR2 +9 kb and +89 kb ACRs. High-scoring sgRNAs targeting these ACRs demonstrated clear PD-1 or TIM-3 expression reduction, confirming their enhancer function (Extended Data Fig. 8a, b).
L51: To interrogate the potential combinatorial function of these enhancers in modulating PDCD1 or HAVCR2 expression, we performed multi-enhancer perturbation at the single-cell level. CD8 T cells were co-transduced with three all-in-one CRISPRi constructs, each targeting a distinct enhancer of PDCD1 or HAVCR2 and expression of PD-1 or TIM-3 was assessed (Fig. 4a, b). We targeted the PDCD1 enhancers (PEN for the entire enhancer versus PES above for the specific sequence with the enhancer), PEN1 to PEN5 and HAVCR2 enhancers (HEN), HEN1 to HEN5 as well as ACRs proximal to the TSSs as positive controls with sgRNAs using CRISPRi (Fig. 4c, g). Combinatorial perturbation of enhancers in individual CD8 T cells using CRISPRi led to additive reduction in expression of PDCD1 or HAVCR2 (Fig. 4d, h). At the PDCD1 locus, three double-enhancer perturbations resulted in significantly stronger reduction of PD-1 expression compared to their respective single-enhancer perturbations, including: PEN2–PEN3 (+14.8kb─-4.4kb), PEN2–PEN4 (+14.8kb─-4.65kb) and PEN1–PEN3 (+16.1kb─- 4.4kb) (Fig. 4e, f and Extended Data Fig. 8c, d). For HAVCR2, seven specific double-enhancer combinations generated more effective regulation of TIM-3 expression compared to their corresponding single-enhancer perturbations, these enhancer-pairs are: HEN1-HEN2 (+89kb─+84kb), HEN2-HEN4 (+84kb─+9kb), HEN3-HEN5 (+78.5kb─-33kb), HEN1-HEN5 (+89kb─-33kb), HEN1-HEN4 (+89kb─+9kb), HEN1-HEN3 (+89kb─+78.5kb), and HEN3-HEN4 (+78.5kb─+9kb) (Fig. 4i-k and Extended Data Fig. 8e-i). Among these dual-enhancer pairs, co-targeting HEN2 and HEN4, resulted in the most robust reduction of TIM-3 expression (Fig. 4i). Co-targeting weak enhancer pairs also resulted in enhanced reduction of TIM-3 expression, but the magnitude varied for different combinations. Dual perturbation of HEN1–HEN3 produced a greater reduction in TIM-3 MFI compared to the HEN3–HEN5 and HEN1–HEN5 pairs, highlighting functional heterogeneity even among weak enhancer combinations. Notably, we identified two distinct triple-enhancer combinations: HEN1-HEN2-HEN4 (+89kb-+84kb-+9kb) and HEN1-HEN3-HEN4 (+89kb-+78.5kb-+9kb), that had regulatory effects comparable in magnitude to those observed when targeting the TSS (Fig. 4i, m). Indeed, targeting the HEN1-HEN3-HEN4 enhancer combination resulted in more robust control of HAVCR2 expression than any of the corresponding double-enhancer combinations (Fig. 4i, l). Collectively, these data revealed the integrated regulation of PDCD1 and HAVCR2 by specific enhancer combinations, providing flexible strategies for modulating the expression of these IRs.
L52: Combinatorial CRE perturbation identifies specific enhancer combinations for fine-tuning IR expression. a, Schematic of triple all-in-one CRIPSRi lentiviral transduction to primary human CD8 T cells. b, Representative flow cytometry plots showing the transduction efficiency of lentiviruses encoding three distinct all-in-one CRISPRi constructs. Cells gated as CD8+ live singlets with a minimum of 100,000 GFP+ cells were gated for further analyses. c, Genomic organization of PDCD1 CREs identified in CRISPRi screens. d, Normalized PD-1 MFI across all single-, double-, and triple-CRE perturbation groups. PD-1 MFI values from single- and double-CRE perturbations were normalized to their respective single- and double-negative controls. e, Quantification of normalized PD-1 MFI of all single- and statistically significant double-PDCD1 CRE perturbation groups. Bar represents mean ± s.e.m.; n = 4 donors from five independent experiments. Filled circles beneath histograms represent single- and double-CRE perturbations, the two perturbed CREs are connected by black lines. Targeted CREs are color-coded as in (c). Asterisks in black indicate significance relative to corresponding negative controls; asterisks in blue indicate significant improvement of dual- over single-CRE perturbations. f, Representative flow cytometry plots of PD-1 expression for the indicated CRE perturbations, numbers on bottom left represent MFI. g, Genomic organization of the identified HAVCR2 CREs from CRISPRi screens. h, Normalized TIM-3 MFI across all single-, double-, and triple-CRE perturbation groups. TIM-3 MFI values from single-, double- and triple-CRE perturbations were normalized to their respective single-, double- and triple-negative controls. i, Quantification of normalized TIM-3 MFI for all single-and statistically significant double- and triple-HAVCR2 CRE perturbation groups. Bar represents mean ± s.e.m. of 3 donors from four independent experiments. Filled circles under histograms denote single-, double-, and triple-CRE perturbations, with perturbed CREs connected by black lines; CREs color-coded as in (g). Asterisks in black indicate significance versus negative controls; blue, significance of double versus single perturbations; pink, triple versus double perturbations. ns, not significant. *P<0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P<0.0001, two-tailed Student’s t-test. j-m, Representative flow cytometry histograms of TIM-3 expression with indicated single-, double-, and triple-HAVCR2 CRE perturbations, numbers on bottom left indicate MFIs of each curve.
L53: Dynamic use of
L54: Expression of PD-1 and TIM-3 is transiently induced upon T cell activation. However, chronic antigen stimulation leads to T cell exhaustion, which is characterized by sustained co-expression of multiple IRs that inhibit optimal T cell function. This process is accompanied by extensive transcriptional and epigenetic reprogramming that remodels the chromatin landscape, including at IR gene loci. The PDCD1 and HAVCR2 enhancers defined above were identified following acute antigenic stimulation. To interrogate the extent to which these enhancers might be differentially active during prolonged T cell stimulation, we used an anti-GD2 CAR that induces persistent tonic signaling and recapitulates hallmark features of T cell exhaustion38,39. Long-term in vitro survival of chronically stimulated CD8 T cells can be augmented by including CD4 T cells40. Thus, CD8 T cells were co-transduced with an all-in-one CRISPRi construct targeting PDCD1 or HAVCR2 enhancers along with the anti-GD2 CAR; donor-matched CD4 T cells were transduced with the CAR alone. These CD4 and CD8 T cells were then co-cultured at a 1:1 ratio for up to 31 days, a setting that supports long-term survival of chronically stimulated CD8 T cells. CD8 T cell differentiation and expression of PD-1 and TIM-3 were assessed over time (Fig. 5a). As expected, this anti-GD2 in vitro co-culture model resulted in a marked decrease in CD62L-CD45RO- (central memory, CM) and CD62L+CD45RO-(stem cell memory, SCM) CD8 T cells and corresponding increase in more effector-like CD62L-CD45RO- (E) and CD62L-CD45RO+ (effector memory, EM) cells by day 31 (Extended Data Fig. 9a). These shifts in T cell subset distribution were consistent across all edited groups (Extended Data Fig. 9b, c).
L55: Dynamics and perturbation of IR CREs during chronic stimulation of CAR T cells. a, Schematic illustrating the tracking of CRE activity and effects of CRISPRi perturbation using an in vitro anti-GD2 tonic signaling CAR T cell model over time. b,c, Temporal dynamics of normalized PD-1 (b) or TIM-3 (c) expression with TSS or CREs targeted as indicated. Lines represent mean ± s.e.m. at each time point, n = 4 donors from four independent experiments. Lines are color-coded as shown in Fig. 4c, g. d,e, Representative flow cytometry histograms of PD-1 (d) or TIM-3 (e) expression at days 10 and 31 with TSS or CREs targeted by CRISPRi as indicated. MFI on plot as indicated, colors coded accordingly. f, Comparison of TIM-3 expression at days 10 and 31 following perturbation of HAVCR2 +84kb CRE edited. Bar represents the mean ± s.e.m;, n= 4 donors form four independent experiments. Lines connect individual donors. P<0.05, **P < 0.01, two-tailed Student’s t-test.
L56: Temporal analysis of PD-1 and TIM-3 expression in CAR+ and CRISPRi+ cells revealed dynamic patterns of expression. Targeting the PDCD1 TSS initially resulted in efficient reduction of PD-1 expression, but this inhibitory effect gradually waned from day 10 to 28 with a recovery of suppression by day 31 (Fig. 5b). Similar dynamic patterns were observed for enhancer-targeted groups (Fig. 5b). All of the PDCD1 enhancers had their strongest impact during the initial ∼3 weeks of culture (Fig. 5b, d; Extended Data Fig. 9d) when development of T cell exhaustion is being established.
L57: The pattern of regulation of TIM-3 was distinct from PD-1. CRISPRi targeting the HAVCR2 TSS induced robust and sustained reduction in gene expression (Fig. 5c). Among the enhancers, targeting the +84 kb and +9 kb elements resulted in early reduction of TIM-3 expression that became stronger over time (Fig. 5c), consistent with the gradual increase in TIM-3 gene expression as T cell exhaustion advances41. However, although the +84 kb and +9 kb enhancers initially exerted comparable effects on TIM-3 expression, the potency of these two enhancer elements diverged from day 13 onward. CRISPRi mediated targeting of the +84 kb enhancer reduced TIM-3 expression ∼40% on day 10 but this effect increased to ∼70% by day 31, nearly approaching the efficiency achieved by targeting the TSS (Fig. 5c). The progressive decline in TIM-3 expression (MFI) over time suggested that the activity of this enhancer increased steadily as T cell differentiation progressed to terminal exhaustion (Fig. 5f). Furthermore, from day 17 onward, the TIM-3 MFI in cells edited at the +84 kb enhancer remained lower than in cells subjected to other enhancer perturbations, underscoring the dominant role of this +84kb enhancer in regulating HAVCR2 expression. In contrast, the +9 kb enhancer had a biphasic impact, with increased activity at day 13, declining modestly until day 21, then increasing again from day 25 to day 31 (Fig. 5c). The impact of the +78.5 kb enhancer was negligible at day 10 but became stronger as T cell differentiation progressed (Fig. 5c, 5e; Extended Data Fig. 9e). Intriguingly, the −33 kb and +89 kb enhancers showed no detectable activity before day 28, but at later time points these enhancers showed modest control over TIM-3 expression, implicating these regulatory regions in control of HAVCR2 expression at later dysfunctional stages (Fig. 5c, e; Extended Data Fig. 9e). Together, these data reveal distinct dynamic patterns of enhancer use by PDCD1 versus HAVCR2 over time during T cell differentiation in this in vitro model. In particular, the PDCD1 +14.8kb, 16.1kb, -4.4kb and -4.65kb enhancers, the HAVCR2 +84kb, +78.5kb and +9kb enhancers, remain functionally active even at late stage of long-term in vitro induction.
L58: Fine-tuning inhibitory receptor expression via enhancer editing enhances CAR T cell efficacy
L59: Targeting IRs through antibody blockade has demonstrated substantial therapeutic efficacy in cancer treatment, highlighting the potential of genetic engineering to harness these regulatory pathways. However, complete genetic loss of IRs can exacerbate exhaustion, impair long-term responses23, and prevent formation of proper T cell memory9,24. We therefore investigated how genetic targeting of the non-coding DNA elements controlling IR expression, rather than full IR KO, would compare for optimizing CAR T cell biology. Here, we focused on TIM-3. In vitro, manipulating TIM-3 function on human T cells using antibodies can improve effector function and lead to preservation of CD62L+ central memory (CM) like differentiation42,43. We used two approaches to modulate expression of this IR in anti-GD2 targeting CAR T cells. First, HAVCR2 was genetically ablated by CRISPR-Cas9-mediated targeting of coding exons. Second, we targeted HES2 (within the +84kb enhancer) to fine-tune HAVCR2 expression (Fig. 6a). Engineered anti-GD2 CAR T cells were cultured with 143B tumor cells that were replenished every four days to maintain the same CAR T cell to tumor ratio over time (Fig. 6a) and TIM-3 editing efficiency was consistent and persistent over time (Fig. 6b). On day 4, CAR T cells with a control edit (sgCtl), edit of the coding sequence to generate a TIM-3 KO (sgTIM-3-exon), or edit of the +84kb HES2 (sgTIM-3-84kb-en) to generate a partial knock down (KD) of TIM-3 all resulted in robust tumor killing (Fig. 6c). However, by day 8 of co-culture with tumor cells, the control and TIM-3 KO CAR T cells lost the ability to fully control tumor cells whereas the +84kb HES2 edited anti-GD2 CAR T cells still retained approximately 50% killing efficiency (Fig. 6c, d), suggesting that the ability to sustain T cell responses due to HES2 editing rather than full KO of TIM-3 may contribute to better tumor control. Moreover, at day 4, the number of +84kb HES2 edited CAR T cells showed a trend towards higher numbers compared to other groups (Fig. 6e). TIM-3 HES2 edited CAR T cells also produced more IFNγ and GM-CSF than full KO CAR T cells, though the enhancer edited and control edited cells were similar for these functions (Fig. 6f).
L60: Fine-tuning HAVCR2 expression via CRE editing enhances anti-GD2 CAR T fitness and modulates IR expression in melanoma TIL-derived CD8 T cells. a, Schematic experimental design of in vitro co-culture of IR-targeting genome-edited anti-GD2 CAR T cells with 143B osteosarcoma tumor cells. CAR T cells were subjected to either indel mutagenesis of an exon or targeted enhancer perturbation. Edited CAR T cells were analyzed on days 4, 8, and 12 of co-culture with GFP+ 143B osteosarcoma. b, Normalized expression of TIM-3 by CAR T cells at each time point (normalized to the negative control at each time point). c, Quantification of tumor cell killing efficiency in negative control, HAVCR2 coding exon, or CRE edited anti-GD2 CAR T cells at each time point (left). Right panel. Representative flow cytometry plots showing the proportion of GFP+ 143B osteosarcoma cells on day 8. Cells were gated as live singlets. Killing efficiency was calculated by comparing the number of viable 143B cells after co-culture to the initial tumor cell count determined based on the E:T ratio. d, Quantification of tumor killing efficiency in negative control, HAVCR2 coding exon, or CRE edited anti-GD2 CAR T cells from day 0 - day 8 using area under the curve (AUC; area above 0) calculated from (c). Lines connect individual donors. e, Total CAR T cell numbers on day 4. f, Cytokine concentration measured from culture supernatant on day 8. Bars represent mean ± s.e.m. of 3 donors. Lines connect individual donors. g, Representative flow cytometry plots of T cell subsets as assessed by CD62L and CCR7 expression in control, HAVCR2 exon, or CRE edited anti-GD2 CAR T cells on day 8. h, Proportion of CD62L+CCR7+ cells from (g) across donors. b-e, h, Data represents mean ± s.e.m.; n = 5 donors from three independent experiments, Lines connect individual donors. i, Representative flow cytometry histograms showing the expression of CD62L and CCR7 by anti-GD2 CAR T cells with HAVCR2 exon or CRE editing as indicated on day 8. MFI values are shown at the bottom right. j, Flow cytometry analysis of T cell subsets based on CD39 and CD69 expression in control, HAVCR2 exon and CRE edited anti-GD2 CAR T cells on day 12. k, Summary of CD39HighCD69High subsets from (j). Bars represent mean ± s.e.m.; from 3 donors. Lines connect individual donors. l, Representative flow cytometry plots for CD39 expression in anti-GD2 CAR T cells with HAVCR2 exon or CRE edited as indicated, numbers on the bottom right denote MFI. m, Schematic of modulating IR expression in melanoma TIL-derived CD8 T cells by CRISPR-mediated CRE-editing. n,o, Representative flow cytometry histograms of PD-1 (n) or TIM-3 (o) expression in CD8 T cells from expanded TIL with coding exon or CREs editing as indicated. Gray shaded areas indicate the PD-1High or TIM-3High populations, numbers denote proportions. Cells were gated as live CD8+ singlets. p, q, Summary of normalized PD-1High frequency (p) from (n) and TIM-3High frequency (q) from (o). Bars represent mean ± s.e.m. of 3 donors from three independent experiments. *P<0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P<0.0001, two-tailed Student’s t-test.
L61: We next investigated whether altering the expression of TIM-3 via HES2 versus exon editing impacted the differentiation patterns of CAR T cells. Complete KO of TIM-3 resulted in substantial loss of CCR7 expression and accumulation of CD62LLow CCR7Low cells. Partial TIM-3 reduction via targeting HES2 within the +84kb enhancer in anti-GD2 CAR T cells preserved a substantial proportion of CD62L+CCR7+ cells, comparable to the control sgRNA group (Fig. 6g-i). Targeting HES2 rather than a TIM-3 coding exon also resulted in lower CD39 and CD69 expression, consistent with less exhaustion or terminal differentiation (Fig. 6j-l; Extended Data Fig. 10a). Consistent with these observations, editing of HES2 in the +84 kb enhancer resulted in fewer CD69HighTCF1Low anti-GD2 CAR T cells at day 12 (Extended Data Fig. 10b). Together, these findings highlight the utility of targeting enhancers to fine tune the expression of key genes in T cells. In particular, such state-specific regulatory elements might provide opportunities to tune the function of genes such as IRs where complete loss may be detrimental to optimal T cell biology.
L62: Cellular therapies beyond CAR T cells, including tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL), may also benefit from engineering non-coding regions to improve anti-tumor activity. Optimization of TIL therapy has gained particular clinical relevance since FDA approval of TIL therapy was recently granted44,45. We therefore tested whether editing PDCD1 and HAVCR2 CREs could modulate IR protein expression in human melanoma TILs. First, analyses of published ATAC-seq data confirmed the presence of the +14.8kb and +16.1kb ACRs of the PDCD1 locus, as well as the HAVCR2 +84kb ACR, in CD8 TILs from human melanoma (Extended Data Fig. 10c).
L63: Next, we tested whether targeting these CREs resulted in decreased PD-1 or TIM-3 expression in CD8 T cells from melanoma TIL (Fig. 6m). First, TILs were expanded in vitro with irradiated PBMCs as feeder cells and high dose IL-2. CD8 T cells from the expanded TIL exhibited high expression of multiple key exhaustion-associated molecules, including PD-1, TIM-3, LAG-3, CD39, CD94, CTLA-4 and CD95 compared to CD8 T cells from TIL biopsy (Extended Data Fig. 10d). The proportions of PD-1+TIM-3+, as well as PD-1+CD39+ and PD-1+CTLA-4+ subsets were increased post expansion consistent with expansion of tumor-specific populations (Extended Data Fig. 10e). These data indicate that expanded CD8 TILs recapitulate key features of exhausted T cells, providing a source of cells to test manipulation of IR enhancers in clinically relevant exhausted CD8 T cells.
L64: Electroporation of Cas9-sgRNA ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes targeting the ESs within PDCD1 enhancers, PES2 (+14.8 kb) or PES9 (+16.1 kb), significantly reduced the proportion of PD-1High TIL-derived CD8 T cells (Fig. 6n, p). Targeting HES2 within HAVCR2+84 kb enhancer led to significant reduction in TIM-3 expression in the expanded TIL-derived CD8 T cells (Fig. 6o, q). Notably, targeting PES2 in the +14.8 kb PDCD1 enhancer resulted in an 18% reduction in PD-1 expression, similar to what was observed in CD8 T cells from healthy human PBMCs shown in previous data (Extended Data Fig. 10f). Similarly, targeting the HES2 decreased TIM-3 expression by 41%, comparable to the effects observed in PBMC-derived CD8 T cells (Extended Data Fig. 10g). These findings demonstrate that the enhancers identified through the CRISPRi screen outlined above provide actionable targets for fine-tuning IR expression in human TILs and more broadly support the strategy of engineering CREs in therapeutically relevant T cell populations.
L65: Discussion
L66: Cell therapies are revolutionizing the treatment of hematologic malignancies and beginning to show promise beyond leukemias and lymphomas46,47. Genome engineering has received considerable attention as a strategy to improve cell therapies, with the potential to improve CAR T cells or TILs for the treatment of solid tumors or other diseases. In particular, CRISPR-based genome engineering and other approaches now enable targeted knock out of negative regulators or insertion of synthetic genes to enhance T cell function offering major potential advances for adoptive therapies48,49. Although there have been some improvements, engineered adoptive T cell therapies often fail due to T cell exhaustion, dysfunction, or suboptimal differentiation50,51. These T cell differentiation trajectories are now recognized to involve extensive epigenetic remodeling, including the use of state-specific CREs or enhancers that drive transcriptional programs such as exhaustion-specific gene expression4,5. In mice, for example, an enhancer at -23.8kb in the Pdcd1 locus controls expression of PD-1 exclusively in exhausted CD8 T cells4,27. Deletion of this enhancer improves differentiation and preserves function28, whereas full deletion of PD-1, although initially beneficial, ultimately results in long-term deficiencies9, 23,24,48. Thus, targeting non-coding enhancer elements to achieve differentiation state-biased regulation of gene expression has the potential to provide new opportunities to control gene expression and ultimately function for cell therapy. It has been challenging, however, to comprehensively interrogate the causality and function of non-coding elements in human T cells because of limitations in the functional annotation and technical barriers to efficiently engineer the relevant enhancers of key genes of interest.
L67: In this study, we established a framework for systematic interrogation of non-coding DNA elements in primary human T cells and assessed the function of these enhancers in regulating gene expression and T cell differentiation. First, we developed a high-efficiency CRISPRi platform that enables scalable interrogation of non-coding DNA elements in primary human T cells. Second, using this platform, we identified multiple functional enhancers controlling critical immune regulators, including PDCD1, HAVCR2, and TBX21, showing that these regulatory elements act both independently and cooperatively to tune gene expression. Third, combinatorial targeting of enhancers enabled graded rather than binary control of immune checkpoint expression, offering a level of precision not achievable through complete gene knockout. Finally, targeting newly discovered IR enhancers in melanoma TIL and CAR T cells reduced surface IR expression. Moreover, fine-tuning HAVCR2 expression via enhancer editing in anti-GD2 CAR T cells enhanced a favorable differentiation state, reduced exhaustion, and increased effector cytokine production upon tumor coculture, compared to complete HAVCR2 knockout. Together, these findings highlight a strategy for precision engineering of immune checkpoint expression via enhancer targeting, enabling rational design of next generation cell therapies.
L68: Enhancer activity is dynamic across the genome and undergoes major remodeling during T cell differentiation and transitions between different T cell states or subsets (e.g. naïve T cells ◊ effector T cells; stem-like precursors ◊ memory or exhausted T cells). Exhausted T cells possess a distinct epigenetic landscape compared to more functional T cell subsets. Indeed, exhaustion-specific enhancers and epigenetic “scars” in exhausted CD8 T cells can limit the function and responses to reinfection or immunotherapy52–55. Overcoming the epigenetic constraints associated with T cell exhaustion or dysfunction remains a key goal for restoring optimal T cell responses. However, genome-wide functional enhancer mapping in low abundance cell populations, such as antigen-specific exhausted T cells, remains challenging. Here, we used activated human primary CD8 T cells to perform large genomic region CRISPRi screens to discover CREs, followed by Cas9-induced indel mutagenesis screens to identify essential sequences within key enhancer regions. Then, to test how these regulatory elements controlled gene expression in exhausted T cells, we leveraged in vitro exhaustion assays including repetitive stimulation models and tonic signaling CAR T cells, that approximate some aspects of in vivo human T cell exhaustion. Finally, we tested the function of the newly discovered PD-1 and TIM-3 enhancers in CD8 T cells from human melanoma. Thus, our all-in-one CRISPRi platform enabled large-scale genomic region multi-layered screens to discover functional CREs that regulate key genes in exhausted CD8 T cells. Moreover, CRISPRa-mediated enhancer activation and CRE-driven reporter assays highlight how this CRISPR-based platform can be used for both disruption and induction of state-specific gene regulation, and even potentially to enable construction of synthetic regulatory circuits. The approach outlined here can easily be applied to other genes and scaled to integrate other single-cell approaches to generate high-resolution, cost-effective maps of enhancer function56,57. Such strategies would enable systematic definition of the epigenetic regulatory circuits that shape T cell fate and function.
L69: IRs are key regulators of T cell activation and function, and have a prominent role in T cell exhaustion58. Indeed, blocking the PD-1 pathway has revolutionized cancer therapy through reinvigorating exhausted CD8 T cells59,60 and targeting the PD-1 pathway or TIM-3 can reverse exhaustion in preclinical models41,61. Although work continues on developing TIM-3-based targeting approaches for human T cell therapeutics62, five FDA approved therapies targeting the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway highlight the clinical relevance of these targets. However, complete loss of PD-1 signals can cause defects in T cell memory and erode the durability of long term of antigen-specific CD8 T cell responses in chronic infections and cancer9,23,24. Strategies that reduce and/or modulate IR expression in a more regulated manner, but do not completely ablate signals from these pathways may strike a balance between limiting negative regulation and preserving T cell fitness. Indeed, targeting an enhancer upstream of the Pdcd1 locus in mice decreases exhaustion28 but such approaches have not been investigated in human T cells. Using the human CRISPRi enhancer screening platform described here, we defined the functional CREs controlling PDCD1 and HAVCR2 expression in primary human CD8 T cells. We identified individual and combinations of enhancers that fine-tuned expression of these IRs and revealed a functional benefit for enhancer editing for regulating HAVCR2 expression compared to complete loss of TIM-3 expression in CAR T cells. These results highlight the potential advantage of targeting enhancer elements rather than gene coding sequences to optimize T cell function in engineered T cells. Moreover, we identified enhancer-combinations capable of a wider range of expression control, offering more tunable strategies for controlling expression of PD-1 or TIM-3 to optimize T cell function. Given the recent FDA approval of TIL therapy48,49, the ability to apply our CRISPR enhancer engineering system to human TILs to target regulatory elements of PDCD1 and HAVCR2 extends this approach to clinically relevant cells. In the future, enhancer editing of tumor-specific cells may offer a strategy to optimize TIL-based cell therapies.
L70: Beyond IRs, other genes represent promising targets for cell engineering. Nodal regulators such as TFs often coordinate suites of genes with related biological functions. TBET, for example, regulates genes involved in effector CD8 T cell biology, including homing, migration, and effector function63. However, high and sustained TBET expression can drive terminal differentiation and/or contribute to more severe exhaustion in some settings64,65,66,67,68. Thus, identifying the regulatory logic controlling TBX21 expression in primary human CD8 T cells may enable selective augmentation of TBET expression in a more physiological and state-specific manner than enforced overexpression. By activating the TBX21 enhancers with CRISPRa, we were able to not only increase TBX21 expression but also enhance downstream cytotoxic genes such as GZMB and PRF1 (Perforin). These findings highlight the potential opportunities of targeting nodal regulators to rewire transcriptional networks in human T cells. It may be advantageous to tune TBX21 expression by using natural non-coding enhancer elements, providing more subtle, but also cell state-specific regulatory control. This strategy could be expanded to other master regulators to provide an avenue for the design of next-generation CAR T and other engineered T cell therapies.
L71: Thus, we demonstrate the potential to regulate human T cell biology by first functionally annotating and then engineering the non-coding genome. The all-in-one CRISPRi approach described here provides a robust platform and can be expanded to study the functional enhancers of other genes at even larger genomic regions. Moreover, there may be additional advantages to build upon this system in the future. Although CRISPR gene-edited cells have been used in humans for cell therapy trials, large DNA edits or deletions in the human genome has inherent risks due to off-target effects and potential chromosomal aberrations especially in settings of multiple edits69. These risks can be mitigated by employing non-DNA-damaging editing strategies, like base and prime editors, as well as other epigenome silencers70–73 to manipulating non-coding elements and control gene expression. Thus, it is now possible to functionally decode the non-coding gene regulatory networks of human T cells and use these annotated enhancer landscape maps to improve T cell biology with potential therapeutic opportunities for engineered cell therapies. These studies lay the foundation for next-generation, epigenetically engineered cell therapies.
L72: 1Leen, A. M., Rooney, C. M. & Foster, A. E. Improving T cell therapy for cancer. Annu Rev Immunol 25, 243–265, doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141527 (2007).
L73: 2Schett, G., Mackensen, A. & Mougiakakos, D. CAR T-cell therapy in autoimmune diseases. Lancet 402, 2034–2044, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01126-1 (2023).
L74: 3Maston, G. A., Evans, S. K. & Green, M. R. Transcriptional regulatory elements in the human genome. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 7, 29–59 (2006).
L75: 4Pauken, K. E. et al. Epigenetic stability of exhausted T cells limits durability of reinvigoration by PD-1 blockade. Science 354, 1160–1165 (2016).
L76: 5Satpathy, A. T. et al. Massively parallel single-cell chromatin landscapes of human immune cell development and intratumoral T cell exhaustion. Nat Biotechnol 37, 925–936, doi:10.1038/s41587-019-0206-z (2019).
L77: 6Korkmaz, G. et al. Functional genetic screens for enhancer elements in the human genome using CRISPR-Cas9. Nat Biotechnol 34, 192–198, doi:10.1038/nbt.3450 (2016).
L78: 7Fulco, C. P. et al. Systematic mapping of functional enhancer-promoter connections with CRISPR interference. Science 354, 769–773, doi:10.1126/science.aag2445 (2016).
L79: 8Canver, M. C. et al. BCL11A enhancer dissection by Cas9-mediated in situ saturating mutagenesis. Nature 527, 192–197, doi:10.1038/nature15521 (2015).
L80: 9Johnnidis, J. B. et al. Inhibitory signaling sustains a distinct early memory CD8(+) T cell precursor that is resistant to DNA damage. Sci Immunol 6, doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.abe3702 (2021).
L81: 10Waterhouse, P. et al. Lymphoproliferative disorders with early lethality in mice deficient in Ctla-4. Science 270, 985–988, doi:10.1126/science.270.5238.985 (1995).
L82: 11Tivol, E. A. et al. Loss of CTLA-4 leads to massive lymphoproliferation and fatal multiorgan tissue destruction, revealing a critical negative regulatory role of CTLA-4. Immunity 3, 541–547, doi:10.1016/1074-7613(95)90125-6 (1995).
L83: 12Nishimura, H. et al. Autoimmune dilated cardiomyopathy in PD-1 receptor-deficient mice. Science 291, 319–322, doi:10.1126/science.291.5502.319 (2001).
L84: 13Ravetch, J. V. & Lanier, L. L. Immune inhibitory receptors. Science 290, 84–89, doi:10.1126/science.290.5489.84 (2000).
L85: 14Hunter, T. L. et al. In vivo CAR T cell generation to treat cancer and autoimmune disease. Science 388, 1311–1317, doi:10.1126/science.ads8473 (2025).
L86: 15Amaria, R. N. et al. Neoadjuvant relatlimab and nivolumab in resectable melanoma. Nature 611, 155–160, doi:10.1038/s41586-022-05368-8 (2022).
L87: 16Hodi, F. S. et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med 363, 711–723, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1003466 (2010).
L88: 17Phadke, M. S. et al. Identification of anti-TIM-3 based checkpoint inhibitor combinations with activity in immunotherapy refractory melanoma models. J Immunother Cancer 13, doi:10.1136/jitc-2025-012011 (2025).
L89: 18Sakuishi, K. et al. Targeting Tim-3 and PD-1 pathways to reverse T cell exhaustion and restore anti-tumor immunity. J Exp Med 207, 2187–2194, doi:10.1084/jem.20100643 (2010).
L90: 19Ngiow, S. F. et al. Anti-TIM3 antibody promotes T cell IFN-gamma-mediated antitumor immunity and suppresses established tumors. Cancer Res 71, 3540–3551, doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0096 (2011).
L91: 20Grebinoski, S. & Vignali, D. A. Inhibitory receptor agonists: the future of autoimmune disease therapeutics? Curr Opin Immunol 67, 1–9, doi:10.1016/j.coi.2020.06.001 (2020).
L92: 21Wang, D. Y. et al. Fatal Toxic Effects Associated With Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol 4, 1721–1728, doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2018.3923 (2018).
L93: 22Postow, M. A., Sidlow, R. & Hellmann, M. D. Immune-Related Adverse Events Associated with Immune Checkpoint Blockade. N Engl J Med 378, 158–168, doi:10.1056/NEJMra1703481 (2018).
L94: 23Odorizzi, P. M., Pauken, K. E., Paley, M. A., Sharpe, A. & Wherry, E. J. Genetic absence of PD-1 promotes accumulation of terminally differentiated exhausted CD8+ T cells. J Exp Med 212, 1125–1137, doi:10.1084/jem.20142237 (2015).
L95: 24Pauken, K. E. et al. The PD-1 Pathway Regulates Development and Function of Memory CD8(+) T Cells following Respiratory Viral Infection. Cell Rep 31, 107827, doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107827 (2020).
L96: 25Wei, J. et al. PD-1 silencing impairs the anti-tumor function of chimeric antigen receptor modified T cells by inhibiting proliferation activity. J Immunother Cancer 7, 209, doi:10.1186/s40425-019-0685-y (2019).
L97: 26Wang, Z. et al. Phase I study of CAR-T cells with PD-1 and TCR disruption in mesothelin-positive solid tumors. Cell Mol Immunol 18, 2188–2198, doi:10.1038/s41423-021-00749-x (2021).
L98: 27Sen, D. R. et al. The epigenetic landscape of T cell exhaustion. Science 354, 1165–1169, doi:10.1126/science.aae0491 (2016).
L99: 28Weiss, S. A. et al. Epigenetic tuning of PD-1 expression improves exhausted T cell function and viral control. Nat Immunol 25, 1871–1883, doi:10.1038/s41590-024-01961-3 (2024).
L100: 29Ecco, G., Imbeault, M. & Trono, D. KRAB zinc finger proteins. Development 144, 2719–2729, doi:10.1242/dev.132605 (2017).
L101: 30Qi, L. S. et al. Repurposing CRISPR as an RNA-guided platform for sequence-specific control of gene expression. Cell 184, 844, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.01.019 (2021).
L102: 31Hsu, J. Y. et al. CRISPR-SURF: discovering regulatory elements by deconvolution of CRISPR tiling screen data. Nat Methods 15, 992–993, doi:10.1038/s41592-018-0225-6 (2018).
L103: 32Giles, J. R. et al. Human epigenetic and transcriptional T cell differentiation atlas for identifying functional T cell-specific enhancers. Immunity 55, 557–574 e557, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2022.02.004 (2022).
L104: 33Tycko, J. et al. High-Throughput Discovery and Characterization of Human Transcriptional Effectors. Cell 183, 2020–2035 e2016, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.024 (2020).
L105: 34Alerasool, N., Segal, D., Lee, H. & Taipale, M. An efficient KRAB domain for CRISPRi applications in human cells. Nat Methods 17, 1093–1096, doi:10.1038/s41592-020-0966-x (2020).
L106: 35Groom, J. R. & Luster, A. D. CXCR3 in T cell function. Exp Cell Res 317, 620–631, doi:10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.12.017 (2011).
L107: 36Intlekofer, A. M. et al. Effector and memory CD8+ T cell fate coupled by T-bet and eomesodermin. Nat Immunol 6, 1236–1244, doi:10.1038/ni1268 (2005).
L108: 37Berrien-Elliott, M. M. et al. Checkpoint blockade immunotherapy relies on T-bet but not Eomes to induce effector function in tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells. Cancer Immunol Res 3, 116–124, doi:10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0159 (2015).
L109: 38Long, A. H. et al. 4-1BB costimulation ameliorates T cell exhaustion induced by tonic signaling of chimeric antigen receptors. Nat Med 21, 581–590, doi:10.1038/nm.3838 (2015).
L110: 39Lynn, R. C. et al. c-Jun overexpression in CAR T cells induces exhaustion resistance. Nature 576, 293–300, doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1805-z (2019).
L111: 40Lee, S. Y. et al. CD8(+) chimeric antigen receptor T cells manufactured in absence of CD4(+) cells exhibit hypofunctional phenotype. J Immunother Cancer 11, doi:10.1136/jitc-2023-007803 (2023).
L112: 41Jin, H. T. et al. Cooperation of Tim-3 and PD-1 in CD8 T-cell exhaustion during chronic viral infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 14733–14738, doi:10.1073/pnas.1009731107 (2010).
L113: 42Avery, L., Filderman, J., Szymczak-Workman, A. L. & Kane, L. P. Tim-3 co-stimulation promotes short-lived effector T cells, restricts memory precursors, and is dispensable for T cell exhaustion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115, 2455–2460, doi:10.1073/pnas.1712107115 (2018).
L114: 43Sabins, N. C. et al. TIM-3 Engagement Promotes Effector Memory T Cell Differentiation of Human Antigen-Specific CD8 T Cells by Activating mTORC1. J Immunol 199, 4091–4102, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1701030 (2017).
L115: 44Chesney, J. et al. Efficacy and safety of lifileucel, a one-time autologous tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) cell therapy, in patients with advanced melanoma after progression on immune checkpoint inhibitors and targeted therapies: pooled analysis of consecutive cohorts of the C-144-01 study. J Immunother Cancer 10, doi:10.1136/jitc-2022-005755 (2022).
L116: 45Sarnaik, A. A. et al. Lifileucel, a Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocyte Therapy, in Metastatic Melanoma. J Clin Oncol 39, 2656–2666, doi:10.1200/JCO.21.00612 (2021).
L117: 46Brudno, J. N., Maus, M. V. & Hinrichs, C. S. CAR T Cells and T-Cell Therapies for Cancer: A Translational Science Review. JAMA 332, 1924–1935, doi:10.1001/jama.2024.19462 (2024).
L118: 47Wang, X. et al. Allogeneic CD19-targeted CAR-T therapy in patients with severe myositis and systemic sclerosis. Cell 187, 4890–4904 e4899, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.027 (2024).
L119: 48Stadtmauer, E. A. et al. CRISPR-engineered T cells in patients with refractory cancer. Science 367, doi:10.1126/science.aba7365 (2020).
L120: 49Blaeschke, F. et al. Modular pooled discovery of synthetic knockin sequences to program durable cell therapies. Cell 186, 4216–4234 e4233, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2023.08.013 (2023).
L121: 50Gennert, D. G. et al. Dynamic chromatin regulatory landscape of human CAR T cell exhaustion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118, doi:10.1073/pnas.2104758118 (2021).
L122: 51Beider, K. et al. Molecular and Functional Signatures Associated with CAR T Cell Exhaustion and Impaired Clinical Response in Patients with B Cell Malignancies. Cells 11, doi:10.3390/cells11071140 (2022).
L123: 52Hensel, N. et al. Memory-like HCV-specific CD8(+) T cells retain a molecular scar after cure of chronic HCV infection. Nat Immunol 22, 229–239, doi:10.1038/s41590-020-00817-w (2021).
L124: 53Tonnerre, P. et al. Differentiation of exhausted CD8(+) T cells after termination of chronic antigen stimulation stops short of achieving functional T cell memory. Nat Immunol 22, 1030–1041, doi:10.1038/s41590-021-00982-6 (2021).
L125: 54Abdel-Hakeem, M. S. et al. Epigenetic scarring of exhausted T cells hinders memory differentiation upon eliminating chronic antigenic stimulation. Nature immunology 22, 1008–1019 (2021).
L126: 55Yates, K. B. et al. Epigenetic scars of CD8(+) T cell exhaustion persist after cure of chronic infection in humans. Nat Immunol 22, 1020–1029, doi:10.1038/s41590-021-00979-1 (2021).
L127: 56Schraivogel, D. et al. Targeted Perturb-seq enables genome-scale genetic screens in single cells. Nat Methods 17, 629–635, doi:10.1038/s41592-020-0837-5 (2020).
L128: 57Yan, R. E. et al. Pooled CRISPR screens with joint single-nucleus chromatin accessibility and transcriptome profiling. Nature Biotechnology, 1–7 (2024).
L129: 58McLane, L. M., Abdel-Hakeem, M. S. & Wherry, E. J. CD8 T cell exhaustion during chronic viral infection and cancer. Annual review of immunology 37, 457–495 (2019).
L130: 59Sharma, P. & Allison, J. P. Immune checkpoint targeting in cancer therapy: toward combination strategies with curative potential. Cell 161, 205–214, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.030 (2015).
L131: 60Wherry, E. J. & Kurachi, M. Molecular and cellular insights into T cell exhaustion. Nature reviews immunology 15, 486–499 (2015).
L132: 61Barber, D. L. et al. Restoring function in exhausted CD8 T cells during chronic viral infection. Nature 439, 682–687 (2006).
L133: 62Harding, J. J. et al. Blocking TIM-3 in Treatment-refractory Advanced Solid Tumors: A Phase Ia/b Study of LY3321367 with or without an Anti-PD-L1 Antibody. Clin Cancer Res 27, 2168–2178, doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-4405 (2021).
L134: 63Lazarevic, V., Glimcher, L. H. & Lord, G. M. T-bet: a bridge between innate and adaptive immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 13, 777–789, doi:10.1038/nri3536 (2013).
L135: 64Intlekofer, A. M. et al. Requirement for T-bet in the aberrant differentiation of unhelped memory CD8+ T cells. J Exp Med 204, 2015–2021, doi:10.1084/jem.20070841 (2007).
L136: 65Joshi, N. S. et al. Inflammation directs memory precursor and short-lived effector CD8(+) T cell fates via the graded expression of T-bet transcription factor. Immunity 27, 281–295, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2007.07.010 (2007).
L137: 66Beltra, J. C. et al. Developmental Relationships of Four Exhausted CD8(+) T Cell Subsets Reveals Underlying Transcriptional and Epigenetic Landscape Control Mechanisms. Immunity 52, 825–841 e828, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.04.014 (2020).
L138: 67Paley, M. A. et al. Progenitor and terminal subsets of CD8+ T cells cooperate to contain chronic viral infection. Science 338, 1220–1225, doi:10.1126/science.1229620 (2012).
L139: 68Kao, C. et al. Transcription factor T-bet represses expression of the inhibitory receptor PD-1 and sustains virus-specific CD8+ T cell responses during chronic infection. Nat Immunol 12, 663–671, doi:10.1038/ni.2046 (2011).
L140: 69Tsuchida, C. A. et al. Mitigation of chromosome loss in clinical CRISPR-Cas9-engineered T cells. Cell 186, 4567–4582. e4520 (2023).
L141: 70Choi, J. et al. Precise genomic deletions using paired prime editing. Nat Biotechnol 40, 218–226, doi:10.1038/s41587-021-01025-z (2022).
L142: 71Martin-Rufino, J. D., et al. Massively parallel base editing to map variant effects in human hematopoiesis. Cell 186, 2456–2474. e2424 (2023).
L143: 72Nunez, J. K. et al. Genome-wide programmable transcriptional memory by CRISPR-based epigenome editing. Cell 184, 2503–2519 e2517, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.03.025 (2021).
L144: 73Neumann, E. N. et al. Brainwide silencing of prion protein by AAV-mediated delivery of an engineered compact epigenetic editor. Science 384, ado7082, doi:10.1126/science.ado7082 (2024).
L145: 1Hsu, P. D. et al. DNA targeting specificity of RNA-guided Cas9 nucleases. Nat Biotechnol 31, 827–832, doi:10.1038/nbt.2647 (2013).
L146: 2Sanson, K. R. et al. Optimized libraries for CRISPR-Cas9 genetic screens with multiple modalities. Nat Commun 9, 5416, doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07901-8 (2018).
L147: 3Neumayr, C. et al. Differential cofactor dependencies define distinct types of human enhancers. Nature 606, 406–413, doi:10.1038/s41586-022-04779-x (2022).
L148: 4Weber, E. W. et al. Transient rest restores functionality in exhausted CAR-T cells through epigenetic remodeling. Science 372, doi:10.1126/science.aba1786 (2021).
L149: We thank all members of the Wherry lab and Shi lab, especially J.E.Wu for manuscript discussion and editing. We thank M.McLaughlin and C.Holliday for laboratory support. We also thank Y.Zhu, H.Sun and E.L.Park from Penn Human Immunology Core (P30 CA016520/ SCR_022380). This work was supported by NIH grants AI155577, AI115712, AI117950, AI108545, AI082630, AI149680, HL145754 (to E.J.W.), Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy (to E.J.W.). Work in the Wherry lab is supported by the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy. J.S. is supported by NIH/National Cancer Institute (NCI) (R01 CA258904) and Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy. P.W. is supported by a Momentum Fellowship from The Mark Foundation for Cancer Research. A.C.H. is supported by R01 CA273018, P50 CA261608, Damon Runyon Clinical Investigator Award, Pew-Stewart Stewart Scholars Program in Cancer Research. Huang lab is supported by Tara Miller Foundation and the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy.
[29ms]
